---
title: The Quite OK Image Format
# author: alytarik
date: 2023-10-21 22:22:00 +0300
categories: [C++]
tags: [c++, image]
mermaid: true
---

## Introduction
The Quite OK Image Format ([QOI](https://qoiformat.org/)) is a lossless image format
that is designed to be quite ok. While it is not designed to be the best format for
any particular use case, it achieves much faster speeds in both encoding and decoding
compared to png.

I tried implementing it in C++ as a png-to-qoi and visa-versa converter following the
format specifications file ([pdf](https://qoiformat.org/qoi-specification.pdf)).

## Specifications

QOI start with a header that includes width, height, number of channels (RGB or RGBA) 
and the colorspace. Then the image data is stored in 6 different type of chunks. They
can be categorised into 4 groups:
- A raw pixel (RGB or RGBA)
- A run of previous pixel
- An index of last seen pixels array
- A difference from last pixel (2 types depending on the difference size)

### A Raw Pixel
It is stored in 4 or 5 bytes depending on the need of alpha value. One byte is the flag and
remaining bytes store the RGB values. The alpha value remains same as the previous pixel for
if we don't have alpha.

### Run of Previous Pixel
This is a 1 byte chunk. First two bits are `11`, the flag for this operation type. The
next 6 bits store the run-length. The previous pixel is repeated for the number of times
indicated by the run-length.

### Index from Last Seen Pixels Array
The qoi encoder/decoder should store the last 64 pixels in an array. This operation type
is used to store the index of a pixel in a single byte. The flag is `00` and the next 6
bits store the index value. 

### Difference from Last Pixel
This operation type is used when the difference between the previous pixel and the
current pixel is small enough to be stored in 1 byte. The flag is `00` and the next
6 bits store the difference value. In groups of 2 bits, each group store the difference 
in RGB values. They indicate a signed 2-bit integer value ranging from -2 to 1.

### Larger Difference from Last Pixel
This operation type can be used to store a larger difference between the previous in 2
bytes. The flag is `10`. The next 6 bits store the difference in green value ranging
between -32 and 31, next 4 bits is for red and the last 4 bits is for blue. They indicate
a signed integer value ranging from -8 to 7 in a similar way. An important note here is
that green channel also indicates a general change, so the actual difference in R and B
is calculated by adding the green difference to the red and blue differences.

## Further Reading
- [QOI Format Website](https://qoiformat.org/)
- [QOI Format Github](https://github.com/phoboslab/qoi)